src/course-materials/frontend-fundamentals/week-1/day-2/lecture-materials/intro-to-javascript-control-flow.md, before:

---
track: "Frontend Fundamentals"
title: "Intro to JavaScript Control Flow"
week: 1
day: 2
type: "lecture"
---


# Intro to JavaScript Control Flow


## Learning Objectives


- Know what is "truthy" and "falsey" in JavaScript

- Use the `if...else` statement to perform branching

- Use the `for` statement to perform looping

- Use the `while` statement to perform looping

## Roadmap                             

- What is Control Flow? (5 mins)

- Conditional Expressions - (15 mins)

- Branching Statements (15 mins)

- Looping Statements (15 mins)

- Closing Questions (5 mins)

- Practice Exercises (20 mins)

- Bonus Material


## Lesson Setup  

- Inside your classroom folder, `SEI-FLEX-10-29`, create a folder inside of this week's folder called `js-control-flow-practice`
	- So, `SEI-FLEX-10-29/wk01/js-control-flow-practice`

- Then create a single `.js` file inside of `js-control-flow-practice` called `script.js`


## What is Control Flow?
   

>#### "The execution sequence of instructions in a program determined at run time with the use of control structures".

  

### Basic Types of Control Flow

- **Sequence**:
	- Statements execute one at a time in sequence.

- **Branching**:
	- Different code paths are executed based upon a conditional expression.

- **Looping**:
	- Code is repeatedly executed while a condition is truthy.

  

## Conditional Expressions <small>(15 mins)</small>
   

- In JavaScript, what is considered to be True/Truthy & False/Falsey?

- Comparison Expressions

  
### What is True/Truthy & What is False/Falsey?

- To test what is truthy and what is falsey, let's type the following code into `script.js`:

	```js
	if (true) {
	  console.log('truthy!');
	} else {
	  console.log('falsey!');
	}
	```

- **To run JavaScript in the terminal we use the `node` command followed by the file name**

```bash
$ node script.js
```

- Now we can easily test expressions by typing it in the place of `true`

  
### What is True/Truthy & What is False/Falsey?
   

- Why this _truthy_ and _falsey_ business? Why not just use _true_ and _false_?

- Answer: _Truthy_ and _falsey_ are conceptual and an attempt to treat non-boolean expressions as booleans (`true` or `false`) during runtime. The concept of truthiness/falseyness will often allow us to write code that is more concise

- For example, the number `3`, is considered to be _truthy_ - test it out

  
### What is True/Truthy & What is False/Falsey?

- Most things in JS are _truthy_, so it's easier to remember what's _falsey_...

- There are two data types that are always falsey:   `null` and `undefined`

- There are four values that are falsey:   `false`, `0` (zero), `NaN` (special value of number), and an _empty string_ (FYI, a string with a value of a space is not empty)

- Everything else is truthy!

- **Take a couple of minutes to test a few of the above**

  
### The Not Operator

- The _not operator_ (`!`), also known as the "bang" operator, "flips" a true or truthy expression to the boolean value of `false`, and vice-versa.  

- For example, test the following expressions:

	```js
	!false === true // true
	!null === true // true
	!3 === false // true
	!'' === true // true
	```

- A double `!` operator is a great way to force an expression into its actual boolean value of `true` or `false`:

	```js
	console.log(!!3); // outputs true
	```

  

### Boolean Logic   <small><em>Comparison Operators</em></small>

- Let's review these Comparison Operators that you saw in the pre-work:
	- **`===`** strict equality - best practice
	- **`==`** performs type conversion (called coercion) if necessary
	- **`!==`** strict inequality
	- **`!=`** inequality
	- **`<`** less than
	- **`>`** greater than
	- **`<=`** less than or equal
	- **`>=`** greater than or equal

  

### Boolean Logic   <small><em>Logical Operators</em></small>

- The logical operators **`||`** and **`&&`** are more powerful than meets the eye

- The logical `||` (OR) operator always returns the first operand if it is truthy, otherwise the second operand is returned:

	```js
	'hello' || 'goodbye'  // evaluates to 'hello'
	0 || null  // evaluates to null
	```

  

### Boolean Logic   <small><em>Logical Operators</em></small>

- The logical `&&` (AND) operator always returns the first operand if it is falsey, otherwise the second operand is returned:

	```js
	'hello' && 'goodbye'  // evaluates to 'goodbye'
	0 || null  // evaluates to 0
	```

  
### Conditional Expressions
   

- The `if`, `for` and `while` statements all require a _conditional expression_. For example:

	```js
	let x = 1;
	while (x <= 10) {
	  var msg = 'Item ' + x;
	  console.log(msg);
	  x++;
	}
	```
	Where, `x <= 10` is the conditional expression.
	
- **❓ If `x <= 10` was replaced with just `x`, would it still be considered a valid conditional expression?**

  
## Review Questions
   

1. **Is the value of 0 (zero) truthy or falsey?**

2. **Is an empty string truthy or falsey**

3. **Is an "empty" object (an object with no properties) truthy or falsey?**

4. **What value does `!!0` evaluate to?**

  
## The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if..else</span> Branching Statement <small>(15 mins)</small>
   

- As you saw in the pre-work, the `if` and the optional `else` clause allows us to conditionally execute code

  
### The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if</span> Branching Statement <small>Single Path</small>

- Single path `if`:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

	```js
	if (val === 1) {
	  console.log('This code will run only if val equals 1');
	}
	```

- Conditional expression must be surrounded by parens

- If you have only a single statement that needs to execute, you can write that statement without using curly braces (used to define a block statement):

	```js
	if (val === 1) console.log('This code will run only if val equals 1');
	```
	This code is the same as the example above.

  
### The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if..else</span> <small>(dual path)</small>
   

- Dual paths `if` with `else`:

	```js
	if (val === 1) {
	  console.log('val is one');
	} else {
	  console.log('val is not one');
	}
	```

  
### The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if..else..if</span> <small>(three or more paths)</small>

- If you have three or more code paths use `if` with as many `else if` statements as necessary and optionally a final `else`:

	```js
	if (val === 1) {
	  console.log('val is one');
	} else if (val === 2) {
	  console.log('val is two');
	} else if (val === 3) {
	  console.log('val is three');
	} else {
	  console.log('not one, two, or three');
	}
	```

- As always, the final `else` is optional

- Any questions regarding branching with `if...else`?

  
### 💪 Exercise - Branching Statements <small>(5 mins)</small>

- Write the `if...else..if` statement that console.logs the following based upon the value of a variable named `color`:
	- If the value is `green`, log `Go`
	- If the value is `yellow`, log `Slow`
	- If the value is `red`, log `Stop`
	- If the value is anything else, log `Whatever`

- Hint: Don't forget to declare and initialize a variable named `color`

- As always, be sure to ask your local instructor for help if you get stuck!

  

## Looping Statements <small>(15 mins)</small>
   

- Looping statements provide us with the ability to execute a block of code multiple times while a conditional expression is truthy

- We'll take a look at these statements:

	- **`while`**

	- **`do while`**

	- **`for`**

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>while</em></small>

- The first looping statement we'll look at is `while`:

	```js
	let word = '';
	let words = [];
	while (word !== 'end') {
	  word = prompt('Enter a word ("end" to quit)');
	  if (word !== 'end') words.push(word);
	  alert("You've entered: " + words.join(', '));
	}
	```

- Use `while` when you want to continue to execute a block of code _while_ a condition is true

- Beware of infinite loops!

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>do...while</em></small>

- You may choose to use the `do...while` statement instead of `while` to force the code block to always execute at least once

	```js
	let num = 0;
	do {
	  console.log(num);
	  num += 2;
	} while (num <= 10);
	```

- **Do you see why the code block will always run at least once?**

- Again, beware of infinite loops!

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>for</em></small>

- The next looping statement we'll look at is the `for` statement:

	```js
	let colors = ['red', 'white', 'blue'];
	for (let idx = 0; idx < colors.length; idx++) {
	  console.log(colors[idx]);
	}
	```

- Notice the `for` loop has three parts after the _for_ keyword:
	1. The _initializer_ which runs only once before looping begins. It is used to declare and initialize a looping variable.
	2. The _condition_ which will be evaluated before each loop. If truthy, the code block will execute.
	3. The last part will execute after each loop and is typically used to increment or decrement the looping variable by one or more units.

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>break</em></small>

- Use the `break` statement within any `while` or `for` loop to immediately exit the loop:

	```js
	let word = '';
	let words = [];
	while (true) {
	  word = prompt('Enter a word ("end" to quit)');
	  if (word === 'end') break;
	  words.push(word);
	  alert("You've entered: " + words.join(', '));
	}
	```
	Note how the `if` statement does not require braces in this case.

  

### Question - Looping Statements
   

- **When using a `while` or `do...while` loop, we must be careful not put the program's execution into an __________ loop.**

- **How can we avoid the above scenario?**

  

## Closing Questions

- **In your own words, how would you describe _Control Flow_?**

- **The three primary types of _control flow_ are:   1) Sequence   2) ___________   3) ___________**

- **What does expression `'happy' || 'sad'` return?**

  

## 💪 Practice Exercises <small>(15 mins)</small>

  

### Practice Exercises

#### Exercise 1 - Branching

- The following JavaScript code will accept string input from the user and store the string in a variable named `choice`:

	```js
	let choice = prompt('Enter a, b or c');
	```

- **Write an `if` statement that 	`console.logs` the following messages**:
	- _a_ entered - "a is for apple"
	- _b_ entered - "b is for banana"
	- _c_ entered - "c is for cantaloupe"
	- anything else - "you're a rebel"

  

### Practice Exercises
#### Exercise 2 - Looping
   

- **Use one of the looping statements to continue to execute the code you wrote in the previous exercise until the phrase _no more fruit_ is entered by the user**

  
## Bonus Material

  
### Ternary Operator

- The _ternary_ operator is ideal when you need to return one of two values depending upon a condition:

	```js
	let message = score > 100 ? "You rock!" : "Keep trying!";
	```
	
	The above one line of code replaces this code:
	
	```js
	let message;
	if (score > 100) {
	  message = "You rock!";
	} else {
	  message = "Keep trying!";
	}
	```

- It can also be used to evaluate one of two expressions, so you can actually run a method if you'd like:

	```js
	score > 100 ? gameWinner() : gameLoop();
	```

  
### <span style="text-transform:lowercase">switch</span> Statement
   

- Look into using the `switch` statement instead of `if...else` if you have more than three code paths and your conditionals always check the same variable

- Here's the documentation for the [switch statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/switch)

Commit message:

adds reference to using repl

src/course-materials/frontend-fundamentals/week-1/day-2/lecture-materials/intro-to-javascript-control-flow.md, after:

---
track: "Frontend Fundamentals"
title: "Intro to JavaScript Control Flow"
week: 1
day: 2
type: "lecture"
---


# Intro to JavaScript Control Flow


## Learning Objectives


- Know what is "truthy" and "falsey" in JavaScript

- Use the `if...else` statement to perform branching

- Use the `for` statement to perform looping

- Use the `while` statement to perform looping

## Roadmap                             

- What is Control Flow? 

- Conditional Expressions 

- Branching Statements 

- Looping Statements 

- Closing Questions 

- Practice Exercises 

- Bonus Material


## Lesson Setup  

For this lesson, we're going to code along using an [`HTML, CSS & JS` `repl.it`](https://repl.it)

## What is Control Flow?
   

>#### "The execution sequence of instructions in a program determined at run time with the use of control structures".

  

### Basic Types of Control Flow

- **Sequence**:
	- Statements execute one at a time in sequence.

- **Branching**:
	- Different code paths are executed based upon a conditional expression.

- **Looping**:
	- Code is repeatedly executed while a condition is truthy.

  

## Conditional Expressions <small>(15 mins)</small>
   

- In JavaScript, what is considered to be True/Truthy & False/Falsey?

- Comparison Expressions

  
### What is True/Truthy & What is False/Falsey?

- To test what is truthy and what is falsey, let's type the following code into `script.js`:

	```js
	if (true) {
	  console.log('truthy!');
	} else {
	  console.log('falsey!');
	}
	```

- **To run JavaScript in the terminal we use the `node` command followed by the file name**

```bash
$ node script.js
```

- Now we can easily test expressions by typing it in the place of `true`

  
### What is True/Truthy & What is False/Falsey?
   

- Why this _truthy_ and _falsey_ business? Why not just use _true_ and _false_?

- Answer: _Truthy_ and _falsey_ are conceptual and an attempt to treat non-boolean expressions as booleans (`true` or `false`) during runtime. The concept of truthiness/falseyness will often allow us to write code that is more concise

- For example, the number `3`, is considered to be _truthy_ - test it out

  
### What is True/Truthy & What is False/Falsey?

- Most things in JS are _truthy_, so it's easier to remember what's _falsey_...

- There are two data types that are always falsey:   `null` and `undefined`

- There are four values that are falsey:   `false`, `0` (zero), `NaN` (special value of number), and an _empty string_ (FYI, a string with a value of a space is not empty)

- Everything else is truthy!

- **Take a couple of minutes to test a few of the above**

  
### The Not Operator

- The _not operator_ (`!`), also known as the "bang" operator, "flips" a true or truthy expression to the boolean value of `false`, and vice-versa.  

- For example, test the following expressions:

	```js
	!false === true // true
	!null === true // true
	!3 === false // true
	!'' === true // true
	```

- A double `!` operator is a great way to force an expression into its actual boolean value of `true` or `false`:

	```js
	console.log(!!3); // outputs true
	```

  

### Boolean Logic   <small><em>Comparison Operators</em></small>

- Let's review these Comparison Operators that you saw in the pre-work:
	- **`===`** strict equality - best practice
	- **`==`** performs type conversion (called coercion) if necessary
	- **`!==`** strict inequality
	- **`!=`** inequality
	- **`<`** less than
	- **`>`** greater than
	- **`<=`** less than or equal
	- **`>=`** greater than or equal

  

### Boolean Logic   <small><em>Logical Operators</em></small>

- The logical operators **`||`** and **`&&`** are more powerful than meets the eye

- The logical `||` (OR) operator always returns the first operand if it is truthy, otherwise the second operand is returned:

	```js
	'hello' || 'goodbye'  // evaluates to 'hello'
	0 || null  // evaluates to null
	```

  

### Boolean Logic   <small><em>Logical Operators</em></small>

- The logical `&&` (AND) operator always returns the first operand if it is falsey, otherwise the second operand is returned:

	```js
	'hello' && 'goodbye'  // evaluates to 'goodbye'
	0 || null  // evaluates to 0
	```

  
### Conditional Expressions
   

- The `if`, `for` and `while` statements all require a _conditional expression_. For example:

	```js
	let x = 1;
	while (x <= 10) {
	  var msg = 'Item ' + x;
	  console.log(msg);
	  x++;
	}
	```
	Where, `x <= 10` is the conditional expression.
	
- **❓ If `x <= 10` was replaced with just `x`, would it still be considered a valid conditional expression?**

  
## Review Questions
   

1. **Is the value of 0 (zero) truthy or falsey?**

2. **Is an empty string truthy or falsey**

3. **Is an "empty" object (an object with no properties) truthy or falsey?**

4. **What value does `!!0` evaluate to?**

  
## The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if..else</span> Branching Statement <small>(15 mins)</small>
   

- As you saw in the pre-work, the `if` and the optional `else` clause allows us to conditionally execute code

  
### The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if</span> Branching Statement <small>Single Path</small>

- Single path `if`:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

	```js
	if (val === 1) {
	  console.log('This code will run only if val equals 1');
	}
	```

- Conditional expression must be surrounded by parens

- If you have only a single statement that needs to execute, you can write that statement without using curly braces (used to define a block statement):

	```js
	if (val === 1) console.log('This code will run only if val equals 1');
	```
	This code is the same as the example above.

  
### The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if..else</span> <small>(dual path)</small>
   

- Dual paths `if` with `else`:

	```js
	if (val === 1) {
	  console.log('val is one');
	} else {
	  console.log('val is not one');
	}
	```

  
### The <span style="text-transform:lowercase">if..else..if</span> <small>(three or more paths)</small>

- If you have three or more code paths use `if` with as many `else if` statements as necessary and optionally a final `else`:

	```js
	if (val === 1) {
	  console.log('val is one');
	} else if (val === 2) {
	  console.log('val is two');
	} else if (val === 3) {
	  console.log('val is three');
	} else {
	  console.log('not one, two, or three');
	}
	```

- As always, the final `else` is optional

- Any questions regarding branching with `if...else`?

  
### 💪 Exercise - Branching Statements <small>(5 mins)</small>

- Write the `if...else..if` statement that console.logs the following based upon the value of a variable named `color`:
	- If the value is `green`, log `Go`
	- If the value is `yellow`, log `Slow`
	- If the value is `red`, log `Stop`
	- If the value is anything else, log `Whatever`

- Hint: Don't forget to declare and initialize a variable named `color`

- As always, be sure to ask your local instructor for help if you get stuck!

  

## Looping Statements <small>(15 mins)</small>
   

- Looping statements provide us with the ability to execute a block of code multiple times while a conditional expression is truthy

- We'll take a look at these statements:

	- **`while`**

	- **`do while`**

	- **`for`**

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>while</em></small>

- The first looping statement we'll look at is `while`:

	```js
	let word = '';
	let words = [];
	while (word !== 'end') {
	  word = prompt('Enter a word ("end" to quit)');
	  if (word !== 'end') words.push(word);
	  alert("You've entered: " + words.join(', '));
	}
	```

- Use `while` when you want to continue to execute a block of code _while_ a condition is true

- Beware of infinite loops!

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>do...while</em></small>

- You may choose to use the `do...while` statement instead of `while` to force the code block to always execute at least once

	```js
	let num = 0;
	do {
	  console.log(num);
	  num += 2;
	} while (num <= 10);
	```

- **Do you see why the code block will always run at least once?**

- Again, beware of infinite loops!

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>for</em></small>

- The next looping statement we'll look at is the `for` statement:

	```js
	let colors = ['red', 'white', 'blue'];
	for (let idx = 0; idx < colors.length; idx++) {
	  console.log(colors[idx]);
	}
	```

- Notice the `for` loop has three parts after the _for_ keyword:
	1. The _initializer_ which runs only once before looping begins. It is used to declare and initialize a looping variable.
	2. The _condition_ which will be evaluated before each loop. If truthy, the code block will execute.
	3. The last part will execute after each loop and is typically used to increment or decrement the looping variable by one or more units.

  
### Looping Statements   <small><em>break</em></small>

- Use the `break` statement within any `while` or `for` loop to immediately exit the loop:

	```js
	let word = '';
	let words = [];
	while (true) {
	  word = prompt('Enter a word ("end" to quit)');
	  if (word === 'end') break;
	  words.push(word);
	  alert("You've entered: " + words.join(', '));
	}
	```
	Note how the `if` statement does not require braces in this case.

  

### Question - Looping Statements
   

- **When using a `while` or `do...while` loop, we must be careful not put the program's execution into an __________ loop.**

- **How can we avoid the above scenario?**

  

## Closing Questions

- **In your own words, how would you describe _Control Flow_?**

- **The three primary types of _control flow_ are:   1) Sequence   2) ___________   3) ___________**

- **What does expression `'happy' || 'sad'` return?**

  

## 💪 Practice Exercises <small>(15 mins)</small>

  

### Practice Exercises

#### Exercise 1 - Branching

- The following JavaScript code will accept string input from the user and store the string in a variable named `choice`:

	```js
	let choice = prompt('Enter a, b or c');
	```

- **Write an `if` statement that 	`console.logs` the following messages**:
	- _a_ entered - "a is for apple"
	- _b_ entered - "b is for banana"
	- _c_ entered - "c is for cantaloupe"
	- anything else - "you're a rebel"

  

### Practice Exercises
#### Exercise 2 - Looping
   

- **Use one of the looping statements to continue to execute the code you wrote in the previous exercise until the phrase _no more fruit_ is entered by the user**

  
## Bonus Material

  
### Ternary Operator

- The _ternary_ operator is ideal when you need to return one of two values depending upon a condition:

	```js
	let message = score > 100 ? "You rock!" : "Keep trying!";
	```
	
	The above one line of code replaces this code:
	
	```js
	let message;
	if (score > 100) {
	  message = "You rock!";
	} else {
	  message = "Keep trying!";
	}
	```

- It can also be used to evaluate one of two expressions, so you can actually run a method if you'd like:

	```js
	score > 100 ? gameWinner() : gameLoop();
	```

  
### <span style="text-transform:lowercase">switch</span> Statement
   

- Look into using the `switch` statement instead of `if...else` if you have more than three code paths and your conditionals always check the same variable

- Here's the documentation for the [switch statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/switch)
